# 128-bit Integer Types

* Proposal: [SE-0425](0425-int128.md)
* Author: [Stephen Canon](https://github.com/stephentyrone)
* Review Manager: [Doug Gregor](https://github.com/DougGregor)
* Status: **Implemented (Swift 6.0)**
* Review: ([Pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-128-bit-integer-types/70188)) ([Review](https://forums.swift.org/t/se-0425-128-bit-integer-types/70456)), ([Acceptance](https://forums.swift.org/t/accepted/71063))

## Motivation

128b integers are the largest fixed-size type that is currently commonly
used in "general-purpose" code. They are much less common than 64b types,
but common enough that adding them to the standard library makes sense.
We use them internally in the standard library already (e.g. as an 
implementation detail of Duration).

## Proposed solution

Introduce two new structs, `UInt128` and `Int128`, conforming to all of the
usual fixed-width integer protocols.

## Detailed design

The `[U]Int128` types are 16B aligned on 64b targets¹ and have the same
alignment as `[U]Int64` on 32b targets. They will match the endianness of
all other integer types.

The clang importer will be updated to bridge `__uint128_t` to `UInt128` and
`__int128_t` to `Int128`. We will not bridge `_BitInt()` types until
the ABI problems with those types have been clearly resolved (see Alternatives
Considered for sordid history).

The `[U]Int128` types conform to `AtomicRepresentable` on targets with
`_hasAtomicBitWidth(_128)` set (notably x86\_64, arm64, and arm64\_32).

The actual API of the types is uninteresting; they are entirely constrained by
their protocol conformances. Notably, these types conform to the following
protocols, and hence to any protocol that they refine:

- Hashable
- Equatable
- Comparable
- Codable
- Sendable
- LosslessStringConvertible
- ExpressibleByIntegerLiteral
- AdditiveArithmetic
- [Signed]Numeric
- BinaryInteger
- FixedWidthInteger
- [Unsigned|Signed]Integer

-------
¹ For the purposes of this discussion, arm64\_32 and similar architectures
are "64b targets."

### Codable details

An earlier version of this proposal conformed `[U]Int128` to `Codable`
with a representation as a pair of `[U]Int64` values. During the first review
period several people made excellent points:

- Making it possible for encoders to customize how they represent these types
is desirable. Some cannot represent all 64b values or might prefer to use a
string representation, others might prefer to treat 128b integers as native
values to encode.

- If we make it customizable but provide a default behavior, some decoders 
would have to support that default as well as their desired representation,
for compatibility with any encodings created between when we added support
and when they defined their preferred encoding.

For this reason, the proposal has been updated to add new protocol requirements
for encoders and decoders to support `[U]Int128`, but with default
implementations that throw an EncodingError or DecodingError unconditionally,
allowing implementations to choose their preferred behavior when they add
support without worrying about compatibility with a defaulted implementation.

Thus, the following requirements will be added:
```swift
protocol KeyedEncodingContainerProtocol {
  mutating func encode(_ value: Int128, forKey key: Key) throws
  mutating func encode(_ value: UInt128, forKey key: Key) throws
  mutating func encodeIfPresent(_ value: Int128?, forKey key: Key) throws
  mutating func encodeIfPresent(_ value: UInt128?, forKey key: Key) throws
  // And matching changes to KeyedEncodingContainer<Key>
}

protocol KeyedDecodingContainerProtocol {
  func decode(_ type: Int128.Type, forKey key: Key) throws -> Int128
  func decode(_ type: UInt128.Type, forKey key: Key) throws -> UInt128
  func decodeIfPresent(_ type: Int128.Type, forKey key: Key) throws -> Int128?
  func decodeIfPresent(_ type: UInt128.Type, forKey key: Key) throws -> UInt128?
  // And matching changes to KeyedDecodingContainer<Key>
}

protocol UnkeyedEncodingContainer {
  mutating func encode(_ value: Int128) throws
  mutating func encode(_ value: UInt128) throws
  mutating func encode<T: Sequence>(
    contentsOf sequence: T
  ) throws where T.Element == Int128
  mutating func encode<T: Sequence>(
    contentsOf sequence: T
  ) throws where T.Element == UInt128
}

protocol UnkeyedDecodingContainer {
  mutating func decode(_ type: Int128.Type) throws -> Int128
  mutating func decode(_ type: UInt128.Type) throws -> UInt128
  mutating func decodeIfPresent(_ type: Int128.Type) throws -> Int128?
  mutating func decodeIfPresent(_ type: UInt128.Type) throws -> UInt128?
}

protocol SingleValueEncodingContainer {
  mutating func encode(_ value: Int128) throws
  mutating func encode(_ value: UInt128) throws
}

protocol SingleValueDecodingContainer {
  func decode(_ type: Int128.Type) throws -> Int128
  func decode(_ type: UInt128.Type) throws -> UInt128
}
```
and given default implementations. The default encode implementations throw
`EncodingError.invalidValue`, and the default decode implementations throw
`DecodingError.typeMismatch`.

## Source compatibility

This proposal has no effect on source compatibility.

## ABI compatibility

This proposal has no effect on ABI compatibility.

## Implications on adoption

Adopting this feature will require a target with runtime support.

## Future directions

Implement clang importer support for `_BitInt(128)` on any platforms where
the finalized ABI is compatible with our layout.

## Alternatives considered

### Alignment and `_BitInt()` types
Clang and GCC have historically exposed the extension types `__uint128_t` and
`__int128_t` on 64b platforms only. These types basically behave like C
builtin integer types--their size and alignment are 16B.

The C23 standard introduces `_BitInt(N)` as a means to spell arbitrary-width
integer types, but these still have some warts. In particular, `_BitInt(128)`
as implemented in clang has 8B alignment on x86\_64 and arm64. For arm64,
this is clearly a bug; the AAPCS specifies that it should have 16B alignment.
For x86\_64, the situation is less clear. The x86\_64 psABI document specifies
that it should have 8B alignment, but the authors of the proposal that added
the feature tell me that it _should_ be 16B aligned and that they are 
attempting to change the psABI.

We would like to be layout-compatible with `_BitInt(128)` on all platforms,
but given the currently-murky state of the layout of those types, it makes
the most sense to guarantee compatibility with the widely-used but non-
standard `__[u]int128_t` and find mechanisms to make `_BitInt(128)` work
once its ABI has been finalized on Swift's targeted platforms.

### Generic-sized fixed width integers
Rather than adding `[U]Int128`, we could implement some form of generic-
sized fixed-width integer (like `\_BitInt()` in C). Given both the lack
of consensus around what integer generic parameters ought to look like in
Swift (or if they ought to exist at all), and the growing pains that 
`\_BitInt()` is currently going through, such a design would be premature.
While other fixed-width integer types are interesting, 128 bits is a couple
orders of magnitude more useful than all the others for general-purpose
software at this point in time.

### NSNumber bridging
`[U]Int128` will not bridge to `NSNumber`. In the future, Swift will need
a careful rethinking of how best to handle type-erased numbers, but we don't
want to pile on the debt by including ever more types in an existing system
that isn't supported on all platforms. In addition, the most common use for
such bridging, unpacking type-erased fields from encoded dictionaries, is
somewhat moot since most existing coders do not support 128b integers. We
will likely revisit this more holistically in the future.

### Codable errors
It would be nice to introduce new `unsupportedType` error cases for the
default Codable conformances, but we cannot add new cases with associated
values and constrained availability to existing enums, which prevents
attaching context or a useful debug description. It's more useful for users
if we use existing error cases `invalidValue` and `typeMismatch` but put an
actionable message in that description field.
